README.md, before:

# hsm - Biophysical prediction of protein-peptide interactions and signaling networks using machine learning. 

<img align="left" src="misc/symbol_name.png" style="width: 25%; height: 25%"/> 

This repository implements the hierarchical statistical mechanical (HSM) model described in the paper [Biophysical prediction of protein-peptide interactions and signaling networks using machine learning.](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41592-019-0687-1) 

An **associated website** is available at [proteinpeptide.io](https://proteinpeptide.io). The website is built to facilitate interactions with results from the model including: (1) specific domain-peptide and protein-protein predictions, (2) the resulting networks, and (3) structures colored using the inferred energy functions from the model. Code for the website is available via the parallel repo: [aqlaboratory/hsm-web](https://github.com/aqlaboratory/hsm-web).

This file documents how this package might be [used](#usage), the [location of associated data](#data), and [other metadata](#reference). 

## Usage

The model was implemented in Python (>= 3.5) primarily using TensorFlow (>= 1.4) ([Software Requirements](#requirements)). To work with this repository, either download pre-processed data (see below) or include new data. The folder contains two major directories: `train/` and `predict/`. Each directory is accompanied by a `README.md` file detailing usage. 

To train / re-train new models, use the `train.py` script in `train/`. To make predictions using a model, use one of two scripts, `predict_domains.py` and `predict_proteins.py`, for predicting either domain-peptide interactions or protein-protein interactions. Scripts are designed with a CLI and should be used from the command line: 

```bash
python [SCRIPT] [OPTIONS]
```

Options for any script may be listed using the `-h/--help` flag. 

Pre-processed / pre-trained data and models may be downloaded from [figshare (doi:10.6084/m9.figshare.11520552)](https://doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.11520552) and should be unpacked at `data/` in this directory. This directory may also be used as an example of how to structure input and output files / directories.

An alternative use case would be to train / re-train a new model in the `train/` code and make new predictions using the `predict/` code. 

### Kinase model issue

We have identified an issue in the dataset used to train the kinase model. For the time being, we suggest not using the kinase model until further updates are provided.

## Data

As reported, domain-peptide and protein-protein interactions are available via [figshare (doi:10.6084/m9.figshare.10084745)](https://doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.10084745). In addition, we provide pre-processed data for this repository and the website repository, 

- Raw training data: [figshare - doi:10.6084/m9.figshare.11520297](https://doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.11520297). Raw domain-peptide training data used to train the core HSM models. Unpack to `data/` in this directory.
- Pre-processed data: [figshare - doi:10.6084/m9.figshare.11520552](https://doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.11520552). Needed to work with this repo. Unpack to `data/` in this directory.
- Data supporting the website at [proteinpeptide.io](https://proteinpeptide.io)

## Requirements
- Python (>= 3.5)
- TensorFlow (1.14)
- numpy (1.18)
- scipy (1.4)
- scikit-learn (0.20)
- tqdm (4.41) (Progressbar. Not strictly necessary for functionality; needed to ensure package runs.)

## Reference
Please reference the associated publication:

Cunningham, J.M., Koytiger, G., Sorger, P.K., & AlQuraishi, M. "Biophysical prediction of protein-peptide interactions and signaling networks using machine learning." *Nature Methods* (2020). [doi:10.1038/s41592-019-0687-1](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41592-019-0687-1). ([citation.bib](misc/citation.bib))

See also, a **website** at [proteinpeptide.io](https://proteinpeptide.io) for exploring the associated analyses (code: [aqlaboratory/hsm-web](https://github.com/aqlaboratory/hsm-web)). 

## Funding

This work was supported by the following sources:

| **Funder** | **Grant number** |
| ---------- | ---------------- |
| NIH | U54-CA225088 |
| NIH | P50-GM107618 |
| DARPA / DOD | W911NF-14-1-0397 |

## License
This repository is released under an [MIT License](LICENSE)

Commit message:

added analysis for publication. updated figshare link

README.md, after:

# hsm - Biophysical prediction of protein-peptide interactions and signaling networks using machine learning. 

<img align="left" src="misc/symbol_name.png" style="width: 25%; height: 25%"/> 

This repository implements the hierarchical statistical mechanical (HSM) model described in the paper [Biophysical prediction of protein-peptide interactions and signaling networks using machine learning.](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41592-019-0687-1) 

An **associated website** is available at [proteinpeptide.io](https://proteinpeptide.io). The website is built to facilitate interactions with results from the model including: (1) specific domain-peptide and protein-protein predictions, (2) the resulting networks, and (3) structures colored using the inferred energy functions from the model. Code for the website is available via the parallel repo: [aqlaboratory/hsm-web](https://github.com/aqlaboratory/hsm-web). Note that the results on the website were obtained using an [old model](#model-updates).

This file documents how this package might be [used](#usage), the [location of associated data](#data), and [other metadata](#reference). 

## Usage

The model was implemented in Python (>= 3.5) primarily using TensorFlow (>= 1.14) ([Software Requirements](#requirements)). To work with this repository, either download pre-processed data (see below) or include new data. The folder contains three major directories: `train/`, `predict/`, and `publication_analysis/`. Each directory is accompanied by a `README.md` file detailing usage. 

To train / re-train new models, use the `train.py` script in `train/`. To make predictions using a model, use one of two scripts, `predict_domains.py` and `predict_proteins.py`, for predicting either domain-peptide interactions or protein-protein interactions. Scripts are designed with a CLI and should be used from the command line: 

```bash
python [SCRIPT] [OPTIONS]
```

Options for any script may be listed using the `-h/--help` flag.

To reproduce analysis and figures presented in the paper [Biophysical prediction of protein-peptide interactions and signaling networks using machine learning.](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41592-019-0687-1), use the scripts in `publication_analysis/`.

Pre-trained models are released with this repo. An alternative use case would be to train / re-train a new model in the `train/` code and make new predictions using the `predict/` code. 

### Model updates

We identified an issue in the original datasets used to train the model published in [Biophysical prediction of protein-peptide interactions and signaling networks using machine learning.](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41592-019-0687-1). As of February 15, 2023, we have corrected the datasets (released on [figshare (doi:10.6084/m9.figshare.22105529)](https://doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.22105529)), and replaced the original models released with this repo with corrected ones. Please verify that you use the corrected models for all predictions (see documentation in `predict/`).

## Data

All associated data may be downloaded from [figshare (doi:10.6084/m9.figshare.22105529)](https://doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.22105529).


## Requirements
- Python (>= 3.5)
- TensorFlow (1.14)
- numpy (1.18)
- scipy (1.4)
- scikit-learn (0.20)
- tqdm (4.41) (Progressbar. Not strictly necessary for functionality; needed to ensure package runs.)


## Reference
Please reference the associated publication:

Cunningham, J.M., Koytiger, G., Sorger, P.K., & AlQuraishi, M. "Biophysical prediction of protein-peptide interactions and signaling networks using machine learning." *Nature Methods* (2020). [doi:10.1038/s41592-019-0687-1](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41592-019-0687-1). ([citation.bib](misc/citation.bib))

See also, a **website** at [proteinpeptide.io](https://proteinpeptide.io) for exploring the associated analyses (code: [aqlaboratory/hsm-web](https://github.com/aqlaboratory/hsm-web)). 

## Funding

This work was supported by the following sources:

| **Funder** | **Grant number** |
| ---------- | ---------------- |
| NIH | U54-CA225088 |
| NIH | P50-GM107618 |
| DARPA / DOD | W911NF-14-1-0397 |

## License
This repository is released under an [MIT License](LICENSE)
